---
layout: post
title: Twenty Minutes on a Mumbai local train
tags: [india, mumbai]
categories: [india]
---

A big part of the excitement of being a resident of Mumbai involves travelling by local trains. It would be an educated guess when I say that Mumbai boasts of one of the most extensive intra-city rail transport in the world.

My commute to work involves a local train journey lasting approximately 15-20 minutes, enveloped between two bus rides. However, this 20 minute journey never ceases to be eventful. I arrive at Borivali Railway Station by bus at about 08:05, and my local train, which arrives at Platform #1, is not until 08:17. However, I'm already all set for boarding. My wallet and mobile phone have been safely tucked into my backpack, which ironically, I wear on my front.

This particular day was a special one. The previous night, India beat Pakistan in a World Cup semi-final clash, and the excitement and anticipation of a World Cup final match with Sri Lanka, and a potential second World Cup win was in the air. I'm not such a huge fan of cricket in India ([here's why](http://www.livemint.com/2011/03/31204905/The-banality-of-the-Indian-cri.html)), but I am happy for a billion citizens of a crazy country. Everybody's talking about how Sachin Tendulkar missed out on his century, and going into excruciatingly graphic detail of how they would treat Shahid Afridi, the Pakistan team captain, for dismissing Tendulkar on 85 runs.

_"We respect him for his comments after the game, but he is a Pakistani after all. We will not spare him with our words"_, says a young man next to me, when I asked him about how he felt about Afridi. People are scrambling to the newspaper stand and buying a copy of Times of India, the highest circulated English-language daily in India. Everybody wants to be the first to know all the facts about the match, and this includes people who watched the whole ~9 hour match.

_"Yes, I watched the match yesterday. I malingered, but I don't think my boss bought it. Later I realized even he was at home, and we had a good laugh, we called Pakistanis names and it was sorted. "_, explains one of the thousands of youngsters who work in call-centers in the city of Mumbai. He has an unsurprisingly familiar fake American accent, and he goes on to explain that this was one of the days he wishes he had a late night shift instead of a morning shift, since the leave he took would cost him a full thirtieth of his paycheck.

There are some people who won't buy a newspaper, and will make it a point of peeking over the shoulders of people who actually purchased newspapers and trying to read whatever they can. This is a particularly irritating bourgeois cliché in India. A couple of newspaper owners snap out at the [peekers](http://i.imgur.com/EP6C2.jpg), asking them to get their own newspapers, or just have plain-old patience. Sharing of resources has never been a problem in Mumbai. In fact, you're expected to share almost anything and everything. Personal space, newspapers, a seat meant for two with five other people. You name it, you gotta share it.

There's a loud honk, and the atmosphere created by the crowd borders on the frenetic. As the train slowly enters the station, there's a flurry of activity on the platform. Even though there's enough place for everybody, there's this sort of hurry everybody is in, to get inside the train. Even before the train has come to a complete halt, hundreds have already boarded and occupied seats. The crowd often crosses the line of hooliganism, and one or two injuries on a train ride are almost a given. 

I manage to shove my way into a Second Class compartment, which is separated from a First Class compartment by a steel grill. This grill almost feels like a symbolic barrier between the upper class and the middle class of Mumbai. But apparently, it's much more complicated than that. _"I have to get into Second Class. I have a month-long First Class pass, but nowadays it is filled with people who don't even have First Class tickets "_, explains a kid standing next to me.

There's a warning message played on the speaker system in the train, about how to handle unidentified baggage. The message is usually played once each in Marathi, Hindi and English. But today, it's being played in Marathi all the three times. A South Indian chap next to me asks what the message was about. I reply, _"If you see any unidentified police, just call the nearest baggage."_

He looks at me, confused, almost as confused as when he heard the message in Marathi. I realize my mistake and both of us burst out laughing. _"I got it, haha"_, he says, and shuffles into the crowd and disappears. It eerily reminds me of the biology lesson in which an amoeba ate a food particle, which got absorbed into it and became a part of the amoeba.   

The crowd in a single bogie of the train has this sort of hierarchy, which is inapparent at first, but once you notice it, it's pretty obvious. The young, and still pretending to be young, of the lower-middle class stand right on the exits of the bogie, often hanging perilously close to the electric poles that fly past when the train travels at it's top speed of 60 kmph. Then come the class of people who'll literally kill for a seat on the train, even when their journey lasts only around 5 minutes, and would not sacrifice their seats for a physically disabled person who managed to get into the general compartment only because the physically disabled compartment was filled with physically able people. We then reach the MBA/IIT examination preparation generation, who're always buried in their books even when there's hardly any place to stand. If it's dark, they'll squint and try to read a few pages. But, you gotta do what you gotta do to fulfill your parents' dreams. Then there are the agitated people. They love to start altercations for the smallest of things, and make it a point to make a scene out of otherwise trivial matters.

_"Ganpatti bappa, morya."_ (praise the lord Ganpati), is the shout from the crowd as the train starts moving from Borivali station. _"They seem to think that taking a deity's name will balance out all the crap that they do later on in the day. I tell you, this karma is a bad concept to judge people at the end of the day. Some wrongs just cannot be righted"_, explains an elderly gentleman. He almost seems disassociated from everybody else in the train, a deranged and dark figure looming amongst a thousand sweaty souls.

He introduces himself as Lavkare, and says, _"I lost interest in cricket when Azhar was caught match fixing. He was my idol."_ He's 65, and still has to work for a living. His only son passed away a few years ago, and his daughter is married off and not in touch with him. _"Sometimes it's amazing how much you have to do, to get two meals in a day. I've been denied my retirement money for five years now, and the _(redacted)_ bank seems to enjoy having me over. They give me tea and biscuits, but when I ask for my money they give me random papers and give excuses. Just last year, I unknowingly signed an agreement saying I would not demand the retirement money before I was 70. I had not brought my spectacles that day and they told me the papers were about releasing the retirement funds. I got all excited and signed them without even reading."_ My heart does a flip as I hear these words. I cannot begin to imagine what he must be going through, and make a mental note to be thankful for the relatively pleasurable life I lead. It amazed me at how quickly he connected to me; maybe he just needed someone to talk to?

Kandivali is the next station, and Lavkare is literally thrown off as he attempts to alight from the train. There's a clash in between the people getting off the train and people attempting to board the train. He falls on the platform floor. He seems hurt, but not a single person stops to even spare a glance. I jump off the train to help him out, but he waves his hands frantically, indicating I get back on the train. Nevertheless, it's too late, and after a halt of around 10-12 seconds, the train is moving. Lavkare smiles and says, _"Son, these trains never wait for anyone. You may be lying on the tracks and they'll run you over so that another thousand people can get to work on time. "_

As much as I would love to hear him out, I have to head for work and I board the next train, bidding goodbye to Lavkare, who'll remain a memorable acquaintance. Malad Station is the next stop. Here, the amount of people who get on the train is relatively lower, and now I'm well positioned at the exit to disembark at my destination, the next station, Goregaon.

As the train slows down at Goregaon, people are already jumping into the bogie/compartment, and their momentum is pushing us (the people who need to alight at Goregaon) further back, while the people behind us shove our backs with their elbows, as if that's helping the situation. In the end, I have to do the same, and shove the people in front of me off the train, some of them are people who'd just boarded at Goregaon. They give me a mean glare, and a couple of them shout obscenities at the me and the people behind me; but what was I supposed to do? I think to myself, _"Fine. You label me, I label you"_. It was their fault that they didn't let the people get down first, which is usually the accepted protocol to minimize collisions. I don't bother even sparing a look back, and am already climbing the stairs which will lead me out of the station.

At the corner of the station, there's a man holding a small child in his arms, along with a woman. _"Excuse me sir, may I have a word?"_, he calls out to me. This is not the first time I've been summoned by a supposed family. I knew how this encounter was going to go down, but I wanted to amuse myself, and played along. He explains how he had come to Mumbai to find work, and how he has to head back to his village, and has no money to purchase the tickets to do the same. I smile, and say that I have no money (which is partly true as I'm two weeks into work and haven't got a paycheck yet.). He quickly resorts to begging, and falls at my feet. This maneuver pushes me off the edge and I turn around and walk away.

The ever-present _tabla_ playing beggar is playing a new and popular song today (for those better informed, _Sheila ki Jawani_), which is quite interesting; even he feels the need to keep up with the ever-changing popular songs. As I am leaving the station, a little boy pesters me for some money, and I avoid him. He follows me around for a minute. When I finally turn to him to apprise him of his failed attempts at begging, I see his left hand holding a mobile phone to his ear. He's talking away and smiling. I'm quite amused and disgusted at the same time, and proceed to my bus which would take me to the office, away from this madness, only for it to begin in the evening on the way back home. But what the hell, I'm loving it. (Nope, McDonalds, I'm not paying you a single rupee)

_PS: If you've never travelled by train in Mumbai, my train route can be spotted [here](http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&msa=0&msid=203734048420848874241.00049ff47418895d99014&ll=19.195757,72.906303&spn=0.173465,0.308647&z=12)._

_Do tweet me ([@hardikr](https://twitter.com/hardikr)) if you liked this article. I would love to hear some feedback :)_
